<div class="front-matter">
# Vita

Ian Sampson holds a English B.A. from the University of Calgary, where he studied medieval poetry and creative writing, and an English M.A. from Simon Fraser University, where he wrote a thesis on Ernest Fenollosa and his influence on Ezra Pound. For his doctoral research at Brown, he received a Doctoral Fellowship from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada as well as a Mellon Foundation Grant for co-organizing a year-long seminar on the Poetics of Research. He has taught courses on Plato, Shakespeare, and modern poetry from romanticism to the present. A translator as well as a poet, he received the 2013 Boccaccio Afterlife Award for his adaptation of a novella from the <cite>Decameron</cite>. He has delivered papers at the <span class="smallcaps">ACLA</span> and the Modernist Studies Association, among other venues, and has published work in <cite>The Calgary Renaissance</cite>, an anthology of experimental poetry, as well as the chapbook <cite>Mona Lisa</cite> from No Press.


# Acknowledgements

<p>Every list, says Georges Perec, ends with an <em>et cetera</em>: for all its promise of inclusion, something is always left out. I therefore dedicate this page to the omitted, without whom this assemblage will always be incomplete.</p>

<p>My thanks to the friends and mentors in Calgary who incited my love of poetry: Helen Hajnoczky, Ian Kinney, Derek Beaulieu, and Christian Bök. To all my peers at Brown for the spirited debates that fueled our seminars – and the chance to hear my ideas, as Lauren Berlant might say, “exposed to others and to [my] own ineloquence.” My thanks to the professors who taught me the meaning of critique (from κριτική, to discern): Ellen Rooney, Jacques Khalip, Gerhard Richter, Timothy Bewes, Susan Bernstein, and Zachary Sng. To Massimo Riva for encouraging my interest in Italo Calvino (and for foregoing an espresso “in solidarity”). And to my committee – Cole Swensen, Michelle Clayton, and Marc Redfield – who read these pages with a judicious balance of scrutiny and care.</p>

<p>My thanks to the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada for a four-year Doctoral Fellowship during my time at Brown, and a Master’s Scholarship before that. To Ray Siemens and the Electronic Textual Cultures Lab at the University of Victoria, for hosting me during the final months of this project. And my thanks to those who responded to early prototypes of these chapters: Ada Smailbegović, Geoffrey Wildanger, and the other members of a year-long seminar on the Poetics of Research, where I first presented my chapter on Georges Perec; Joel Simundich, Jessica Tabak, and Matthew Beach, among others, who workshopped my chapter on Christian Bök; and the panel Copy Writers at the 2016 <span class="smallcaps">ACLA</span>, which occasioned my chapter on Caroline Bergvall.</p>

<p>My deepest thanks to all my family, who, in different ways and in different cities, have supported me through all my endeavors. To John and Sue, for many a glass of kefir, and for the home where I wrote more than half of these pages. (And to Neptune, their irascible cat, for never failing to remind me of his lunchtime – and mine.) To Graeme and Jhoely, for reminding me how to enjoy life on and off the dance floor. To Suzanne and Andreas, who gave me my love of stories, of languages, and of European cuisine. And to Edda and Peter, who showed me how and why to cover a *kölsch* with a coaster (as, one summer at their house in Köln, I stumbled through my first reading of Heidegger’s <cite>Sein und Zeit</cite>). I owe you all more than you can know.</p>

<p>My thanks to Dave Morris and Paper Street Theatre for reminding me that life, for all its proprieties, is improvised. And, most of all, to Bianca, with all my love, for the thread that led me out of the labyrinth.</p>

</div>
