The tension between these two forms of exactitude – formal logic and verbal description – comes to the fore in Calvino’s 1983 book *Palomar*. I say book rather than novel because, like *Invisible Cities*, the text is structured as a series of brief chapters that do so not much tell a story as describe a everyday scene – a scene that ultimately evades description. In terms that recall Perec’s method for tracing the infraordinary (“Describe a street. Describe another street. Compare.”), Calvino lays out his method for the book in the lecture on “Exactitude”:

> Like a schoolboy \[*scolaro*] whose homework is to “Describe a giraffe” or “Describe the starry sky,” I applied myself to filling a notebook with such exercises and made a book out of the material. This is *Mr. Palomar* ... a kind of diary dealing with minimal problems of knowledge, ways of establishing relationships with the world, and gratifications and frustrations in the use of both silence and words. (*Six Memos* 75)

The passage anticipates Calvino’s praise for Francis Ponge later in the lecture: the prose poems in *Le Parti pris des choses* constitute “that very ‘exercise book’ [*quaderno di esercizi*] of the schoolboy who must first of all practice applying his words to the range of the world’s features, which he does with a series of attempts, roughs drafts, approximations.” Calvino characterizes description as an iterable procedure (assigned *per compito*, ”as a task or a duty”) that is able to glimpse things only through successive attempts, fraught with error and frustration even as they compel the writer to persist in his attempts to make the world legible. In each of the chapters, the eponymous hero sets himself the task of describing an everyday phenomenon: waves crashing on the shore, a patch of his garden, a flock of starlings sweeping over the rooftops of Rome. Although he begins by attempting to rationalize his object – for example, dividing the garden or the wave into a grid of segments that can be described one at a time – this method quickly founders when the object proves too complex, too varied, to conform to his abstract models. When one approach fails, he proceeds with another, describing each object again and again, almost compulsively, as if he hopes that scanning the scene recursively will reveal more detail with each pass. His attempts at description remain tentative, error-ridden, and culminate only in frustration, embarrassment, or even shame (when Palomar discovers that his nervous antics have attracted a public audience, as they often do). In some sense, the oscillation between formal rigor and fallible description that structures each of the chapters recalls the dialectic between Kublai and Polo in *Invisible Cities*, except that in this case the two sides are embodied by one and the same protagonist, whose digressions and hesitations unfold entirely within his own mind.